---
layout: single
title: So you want to be a hacker?
date:   2017-04-01 00:27:02 +0200
categories: [dsp17, hacking]
tags: [hacking, resources]
excerpt: About resources from which you can learn how to hack.
---


When I was small I was really excited about **hackers** - I had seen some movies in which
some hackers did magic things with only a few lines in command line.
In reality it doesn't work like this, but there are some movies or movie series (for example *Mr. Robot*) - in which
at least they have shown real hacking environment on some stuff about **social engineering**.

If you want to become a hacker you should learn those fields:
* cryptography
* reverse engineering
* web
* exploits

Actually it's plenty to learn and it's hard to tell from where to start. So what you can do to learn this stuff?

### Hacking resources

I started from [**wechall**](https://wechall.com) - it's a web site on which there is a ranking of hackers. You can link
your accounts from different hacking sites to it. Challenges there are pretty old - I recommend to just create
an account and go to [**overthewire**](http://overthewire.org/wargames/) and link your account.
At [**overthewire**](http://overthewire.org/wargames/) there are challenges in real unix environments to which
you can **ssh**. There is a suggested order for **wargames** - from most basic ones to really hard. Usually there
are some tips or recommended resources to each challenge - you know what to read to get necessary knowledge to achieve
success.

The next site I can recommend for a start is [**hacker.org**](http://www.hacker.org/challenge) - there are plenty of
fun challenges, starting from completely basic to become extra hard. Usually there are no tips and you are on your
own. There is a *forum* on which you can ask questions, but I find it pretty scary. You can find there challenges
from every area - from **web** to **reverse engineering**.

On [**wechall**](https://wechall.com) you can find plenty other sites, so I don't want to spoil more :wink: - you should
be able to find your way in this.


### Minimal background to start

I think the most important thing is to be good at math - they say that math is not needed to do programming, maybe yes.
But if you want to become good at hacking, strong **logical reasoning** is your best friend. It's necessary when
learning **cryptography** or **reverse engineering**. Also strong learning desire, patience and perseverance are the key.

The other skills you may have:
* knowledge about how **http** works
* basic knowledge about networks
* basic knowledge about memory
* ability to write code in some scripting language (**PHP**, **Python**, **Perl**, **bash**)
* **ssh** and **unix** - it's a must
* relational databases - **MySQL**

It's not that you have to master those things, but you have to know how to ask questions and where you can find answers.

You can ask why you should know these things?
It's quite hard to do any simple hacking without basic web knowledge - for example how **POST** request works. Or
without knowing about *binary* or *hex* numbers, it's quite hard to even understand some easy **cryptography** problems.
Without **unix** knowledge it's impossible to do some **web** challenges, because you need some awareness about
directory structure for example.

### Desired background to start

It's really helpful when you are fluent at **programming** in some **OOP** or **procedural** language - functional
paradigm isn't so useful here. I think versatility is a key here - you should be able to switch between languages
(from **Java**, **C#** to **Python**, **C++** or even **C**) - it's needed for **reverse engineering**
(there are challenges in all these languages).
Also knowledge about different architectures and overall awareness how computer works will be helpful
for it. For **reverse engineering** challenges **C/C++** and **assembly** knowledge is crucial - even the easiest
problems are quite demanding. The best is when you know at least how to use **gdb** and how to read **hex dumps**.

For **web** challenges mastery of **PHP** and its flaws will make things easier, because you will know how to inject
a code inside a script or how to perform *SQL-injection*. Personally I'm quite fluent at reading **PHP** documentation,
but I'm very far from knowing how to write good code (is it even possible?!) in it. I can hack some scripts in it,
but definitely I'm not a master of any of its frameworks. Some basic **javascript** is also very useful - usually
you have to change something or just be able to understand what's going on.


For **cryptography** challenges it's sometimes good to know *group theory* and other math stuff like this. Being good
at **algorithms** makes it easier to discover how some *encryption/decryption* mechanisms works. Also **programming**
skills are useful here, because often it's just faster to design a *decryption* algorithm and implement it, than
do *decryption* by hand (in the most easiest challenges it's possible).


### Conclusion

Of course these are my opinions based on my experience. Joining this hacking community didn't made me a better
programmer, but it made me a better in security. It's a specific community - don't expect too much guidance or nice
words there.
Now, I'm more aware about security flaws, also I can see them more easily when surfing the **internet**. So I guess
it's really good thing to learn at least the basics.

Let me know in comments about your experiences!
