---
layout: single
title: P versus NP
date:   2017-04-15 12:40:02 +0100
categories: [dsp17, cs]
excerpt: P versus NP and why does it matter?
---

This post will be about some very important and unsolved problems in Computer Science
and a reasons why it matters in case of AI. Decision problems are those which have an output **YES** or **NO**.
I'll focus on issues with sets of decision problems like $$NP$$, $$P$$ and $$PSPACE$$ and their consequences.
I'm assuming you know a bit about [Touring machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_machine) - in short words
it's an abstract machine that can simulate any algorithm we can write in any programming language using current model
of computation (so for example on your computer).

### What does it mean that decision problem is in $$P$$? And $$NP$$?

Problems in $$P$$ are those, which can be solved using polynomial time.
It means for solving $$P$$ problems in polynomial time we need a deterministic Touring machine.
Greatest common divisor or minimum in list are very common $$P$$ problems. Actually I silently stated that
they are described in decision manner, for minimum in list it is: *Does $$x$$ is minimum element in list $$l$$?*.
Here is an example of finding minimum in list, which can help with solving minimum in list problem:

{% highlight erlang %}
    min([]) -> error;
    min([H|T]) -> min_helper(T, H).

    min_helper([], CurrentMin) -> CurrentMin;
    min_helper([H|T], CurrentMin) when CurrentMin > H ->
      min_helper(T, H);
    min_helper([_|T], CurrentMin) ->
      min_helper(T, CurrentMin).
{% endhighlight %}

We can see that it uses $$O(n)$$ time, because we iterate in `min_helper` function over input list exactly once.

For $$NP$$ problems we can verify if a solution is correct using polynomial time. For $$NP$$ problems we
will need a non-deterministic Touring machine (which doesn't exist except theory). And this also means
that when solving problem in $$NP$$ on deterministic Touring machine we *might* need
an exponential time.

The most known $$NP$$ problems are:

* traveling salesman problem
* boolean satisfiability problem ($$SAT$$)

These problems are $$NP-complete$$ which means that every problem in $$NP$$ is not harder
than these problems and they are in $$NP$$ set.

### What is $$PSPACE$$?

We have also $$PSPACE$$ set of problems - they can be solved by deterministic
Touring machine in polynomial space (not time!). Some examples:

* Quantified Boolean formula problem ($$QBF$$)
* Reversi (game)
* Checkers (game)
* Mahjong (game)
* Chess and GO (when we have constraint for number of moves, otherwise they are
proven to be even harder than $$PSPACE$$)

### $$P$$ versus $$NP$$? What about $$PSPACE$$?

Currently we've proven that between $$P$$, $$NP$$ and $$PSPACE$$ sets of problems there is
a relation:

$$
P \subseteq NP \subseteq PSPACE
$$

This inclusion can be understood as *being easier* relation. So any problem in $$P$$ is
easier than any problem which is in $$NP$$ and not in $$P$$. By *easier* I mean that
we can write an algorithm to solve this problem, which will use less time to give us solution.
Algorithms which solve problems in $$P$$ can take for example $$O(n)$$ time
(for example: finding minimum in list) while those
which solve $$NP-complete$$ problems are usually in exponential time (they can be also in subexponential time).

We still don't know if this two relations are only inclusions or equalities also (there are some papers on
$$NP$$=$$PSPACE$$ but there are a lot of discussions about them, for example [NP = PSPACE](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.09562)).
It's the most important puzzle in Computer Science. If there will be a prove
that $$P=NP$$ then all our cryptography (**SSL**) will be unsafe, but I don't want to focus on
this here, because there are plenty information about this.

For me on the first sight wasn't obvious why $$ NP \subseteq PSPACE $$. But when I thought
that you can iterate for exponential time using polynomial space it became clear
that $$PSPACE$$ problems are not easier than problems in $$NP$$.

### Important decision problems: $$SAT$$ and $$QBF$$

Boolean satisfiability problem ($$SAT$$) is about checking if given propositional logical
formula is satisfiable.
So for example when having formula like this: $$(x \lor y \lor z ) \land (x \lor \lnot y \lor \lnot z)$$ we want to know
if we can assign to all variables values from $$(TRUE, FALSE)$$ to make this formula to be $$TRUE$$. In this case to
satisfy this formula all variables can be set to $$TRUE$$.

It's proven that $$SAT$$ is $$NP$$-complete (so every problem
which is in $$NP$$ is at least less hard than $$SAT$$) and it's not my point to prove
that here. If you want to find it search for **Cook–Levin theorem**.
Of course there are some variants of $$SAT$$ problems with added constraints that are
in $$P$$ - for example $$2-SAT$$ (when the number of literals in clause is limited to
$$2$$).

Quantified Boolean formula problem ($$QBF$$) is a generalization of $$SAT$$ - we just add
quantifiers (for all - $$ \forall $$ or exists - $$ \exists $$) to given formulas, for example:
$$ \forall x\  \exists y\  \exists z\  ((x  \lor z) \land y) $$

So we can say that every theorem has its $$QBF$$ form, because in theorems we use quantifiers and logical formulas.
$$QBF$$ is proven to $$PSPACE$$-complete and $$PSPACE$$ problems are not easier than $$NP$$ problems.

### What complexity of $$SAT$$ and $$QBF$$ has to do with AI?

Till we don't prove $$ N = NP $$ artificial intelligence machines
which learnt how to code still will need person who would approve the code, because
of their non-deterministic approach - we have great heuristic algorithms, but they can have a different outputs for the
same input. And until we prove even more - that also $$ PSPACE = NP $$ it will be not possible to even design an
algorithm which allow us to generate a code for all given issues. We still can teach AI to do some coding, but
the correctness will be hard to prove (the same as halting problem) - currently there
are only heuristics, they can be better and better, but still it's a
non-deterministic approach which needs to be verified by human.

[P vs NP - further reading](https://www.win.tue.nl/~gwoegi/P-versus-NP.htm)
