---
layout: single
title: P versus NP
date:   2017-05-29 12:40:02 +0100
categories: [dsp17, cs]
excerpt:
---

## Important decision problems


### $$SAT$$ is $$NP$$

Boolean satisfiability problem ($$SAT$$) is about checking if given propositional logical
formula is satisfiable.
So for example when having formula like this: $$(x \lor y \lor z ) \land (x \lor \lnot y \lor \lnot z)$$ we want to know
if we can assign to all variables values from $$(TRUE, FALSE)$$ to make this formula to be $$TRUE$$. In this case to
satisfy this formula all variables can be set to $$TRUE$$.

It's proven that $$SAT$$ is $$NP$$-complete (so every problem
which is in $$NP$$ is at least less hard than $$SAT$$) and it's not my point to prove
that here. If you want to find it - search for **Cook–Levin theorem**.
Of course there are some variants of $$SAT$$ problems with added constraints that are
in $$P$$ - for example $$2-SAT$$ (when the number of literals in clause is limited to
$$2$$).

You can reduce any problem in $$NP$$ to $$SAT$$ - it can be used to find a heuristics
of traveling salesman problem for example. It is also easy to represent it
this problem using programming language or formal logic. That's why there are
plenty of $$SAT$$-solvers.

### Important decision problems - $$QBF$$

Quantified Boolean formula problem ($$QBF$$) is a generalization of $$SAT$$ - we just add
quantifiers (for all - $$ \forall $$ or exists - $$ \exists $$) to given formulas, for example:
$$ \forall x\  \exists y\  \exists z\  ((x  \lor z) \land y) $$.

It is a $$PSPACE$$-complete problem, so it seems to be even harder than $$SAT$$.
This problem is important, because it's all about reasoning.
There exist some $$QBF$$-solvers, which do some heuristics on solution.
They are used in AI, but also in automatic theorem provers.

### So why $$P$$ vs $$NP$$ matters?

There are some consequences that we cannot solve $$SAT$$ and $$QBF$$ in reasonable
time. For example Artificial Intelligence still is based on heuristic algorithms, so they can have not
deterministic output.

The other thing is that when doing software development it's nice to know
problems which are in $$NP$$, $$PSPACE$$ or even higher complexity classes. If you know
it, you will a



[P vs NP - further reading](https://www.win.tue.nl/~gwoegi/P-versus-NP.htm)
